{\rtf1\ansi\ansicpg1252\deff0\nouicompat\deflang1033\deflangfe1033{\fonttbl{\f0\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times New Roman;}{\f1\fmodern\fprq1\fcharset0 Consolas;}{\f2\froman\fprq2\fcharset0 Times;}{\f3\fswiss\fprq2\fcharset0 Calibri;}}
{\colortbl ;\red0\green0\blue255;\red212\green212\blue212;\red0\green0\blue0;}
{\*\generator Riched20 10.0.19041}{\*\mmathPr\mnaryLim0\mdispDef1\mwrapIndent1440 }\viewkind4\uc1 
\pard\widctlpar\b\f0\fs24 Code documentation for:\par
\b0 "The aging transcriptome and cellular landscape of human lung in relation to SARS-CoV-2"\b\par
\b0\par
===============================================================\b\fs32\par
I. GTEx analysis\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\par
\b Requirements:\par
\b0 Perl\par
R (v.3.6.1 used for the analysis, but other versions ok)\par
\tab -data.table\par
\tab -DESeq2\par
\tab -limma\par
\tab -ggplot2\par
\tab -ggsci\par
\tab -ggpubr\par
\tab -tidyr\par
\tab -RColorBrewer\par
\tab -DEGreport\par
\tab -xCell\par
\tab -superheat\par
\tab -MuSiC\par
\tab -xbioc\par
\tab -scater\par
\tab -Seurat\par
\tab -Biobase\par
\tab -dplyr\par

\pard\widctlpar\fi720 -NMF\par
-ordinal\par

\pard\widctlpar\b\fs32\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\b\fs32\par
\fs24 Part A || Data accession and pre-processing\par
\par
1. \b0 Download GTEx data from {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://gtexportal.org/home/datasets }}{\fldrslt{https://gtexportal.org/home/datasets\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24 .\par
-TPM matrix: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://storage.googleapis.com/gtex_analysis_v8/rna_seq_data/GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_RNASeQCv1.1.9_gene_tpm.gct.gz }}{\fldrslt{https://storage.googleapis.com/gtex_analysis_v8/rna_seq_data/GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_RNASeQCv1.1.9_gene_tpm.gct.gz\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
-Raw read count matrix: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://storage.googleapis.com/gtex_analysis_v8/rna_seq_data/GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_RNASeQCv1.1.9_gene_reads.gct.gz }}{\fldrslt{https://storage.googleapis.com/gtex_analysis_v8/rna_seq_data/GTEx_Analysis_2017-06-05_v8_RNASeQCv1.1.9_gene_reads.gct.gz\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
-Reformatted sample annotations for all GTEx samples is provided here in \ldblquote sample-info.txt\rdblquote . However, because the detailed clinical annotations are under controlled access, we are unable to provide the complete identified tables here.\par
\par
\par
\b 2.\b0  Subset the GTEx data to select organs:\par
\par
\f1\fs20\tab $ perl filter-tissue-RNA.pl > GTEX-counts.filterTissue.txt\fs24\par
\f0\par
Then edit the perl script and rerun with the TPM matrix (see lines 29-32):\par
\par
\f1\tab\fs20 $ perl filter-tissue-RNA.pl > GTEX-TPM.filterTissue.txt\fs24\par
\f0\par
\b 3.\b0  Next, filter the sample annotations to the same select organs, while also renaming the samples to be consistent with R\rquote s naming conventions:\par
\par
\f1\fs20\tab $ perl filter-tissue-annotation.pl > sample-info.filterTissue.rn.txt\fs24\par
\par
\b\f0 4. \b0 Install R ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.r-project.org/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.r-project.org/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24 ). For this study, R v3.6.1 was used, but other iterations of R should also work.\par
\par
\b 5. \b0 In R, sum duplicate gene rows in the GTEx data (run separately for TPM and raw count matrices).\par
\par
-This can be achieved by opening R, and pasting the commands in the file "geneSum.R" into the console.\par
-Alternatively, run from the command line: \par
\par
\f1\fs20\tab $ chmod 777 geneSum.R\par
\tab $ Rscript --vanilla geneSum.R\cf2\par
\cf0\f0\fs24\par
This step can take a long time to run, so it is recommended to execute this on a computing cluster node, if available.\par
\par
You should now have the preprocessed forms of the GTEx expression matrices (both TPM and raw read counts), as well as a preprocessed sample annotation file. These files would be named \ldblquote GTEX-TPM.filterTissue.geneSum.txt\rdblquote , \ldblquote GTEX-counts.filterTissue.geneSum.txt\rdblquote , and \ldblquote sample-info.filterTissue.rn.txt\rdblquote , respectively.\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part B || Identification and analysis of age-associated genes\par
1. \b0 While in R, install DESeq2 from Bioconductor:\par
\par

\pard\widctlpar\li720\tx916\tx1832\tx2748\tx3664\tx4580\tx5496\tx6412\tx7328\tx8244\tx9160\tx10076\tx10992\tx11908\tx12824\tx13740\tx14656\f1\fs20 if (!requireNamespace("BiocManager", quietly = TRUE))\par
    install.packages("BiocManager")\par
\par
BiocManager::install("DESeq2")\par

\pard\widctlpar\f0\fs24\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 Use DESeq2 to identify lung age-associated genes using the processed count matrix. \par
-This can be achieved by opening R, and pasting the commands in the file "deseq2-age.R" into the console. However, it is strongly recommended run this from the command line on a computing cluster, as these calculations are intensive: \par
\par
\f1\fs20\tab $ chmod 777 deseq2-age.R\par
\tab $ Rscript --vanilla deseq2-age.R\cf2\par
\cf0\f0\fs24\par
Since we are seeking to control for sex, smoking status, and Hardy scale, we require additional clinical annotations that are not publicly available on the GTEx website. For the sake of completion, we provide here an anonymized table of the GTEx annotations as a reference for the user (\ldblquote sample-info.filterTissue.anonymized.full.txt\rdblquote ).\par
\par
The result is an RDS file \ldblquote DESeq2.LRT.agebin.rds" that contains all of the relevant statistics on the relation between age and gene expression, controlling for sex, smoking status, and Hardy scale. The differential expression table can be obtained by running the code in \ldblquote create-difex-tables.R\rdblquote . \par
\par
The latter part of \ldblquote create-difex-tables.R\rdblquote  also performs variance stabilizing transformation on the count data, followed by correction for sex, smoking status, and Hardy scale. We note that the corrected expression values are for visualization and clustering purposes, but not for statistical identification of age-associated genes (which has already been done earlier).\par
\par
\b 3. \b0 Since the p-values reported by DESeq2 are for age in general (as in across the various age groups), the different pairwise DESeq2 result tables should all have the same p-values and significant genes reported. The difference is the log2FC and lfc_SE values, which are specific to the particular pairwise comparison. \par
\par
You can compile all of these different fold change values using the script \ldblquote compile-DE-tables.pl\rdblquote . This then produces \ldblquote GTEx-lung-DEseq2-results.LRT.timeBin.combined.SexSmokingIschemia.all.txt\rdblquote . \par
\par
\b 4. \b0 Next, we want to cluster the age-associated genes and identify those that consistently trend upwards or downwards in expression with aging. This step uses the transformed and adjusted expression matrix produced above in Step 2.\par
\par
-In R, install ggpubr, tidyr, RColorBrewer, ggsci, and DEGreport. \par
-Still in R, run the commands in "gene-clusters-timecourse.R"\par
\par
-The PDF file is a plot of the age-associated genes in clusters 1 and 2 that increase or decrease with aging, respectively. \par
-The text file is a table of the age-associated genes and their age cluster labels. Please note that age-associated genes present in other clusters are removed, as they do not show concordant age-associations and were thus removed from further analysis.\par
\par
\b 5. \b0 The gene list can be directly submitted for DAVID gene ontology/pathway analysis: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ }}{\fldrslt{https://david.ncifcrf.gov/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part C || General RNA-seq expression visualization functions\par
\b0 For visualizing the expression of different genes in human lung (stratified by age), we used a core script "gene-plot-vs-age.R", changing the desired gene names as needed (see line 23) and the relevant plotting parameters (see lines 50-51). The input matrix could be either the TPM matrix from GTEx, or the transformed and adjusted matrix from above, depending on the specific situation.\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part D || Analysis and visualization of cell type enrichment scores (CIBERSORTx)\par
1. \b0 Cell type enrichment scoring from bulk RNA-seq data was performed using the CIBERSORTx Docker image. You can request access to the offline standalone tool at {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://cibersortx.stanford.edu/download.php }}{\fldrslt{https://cibersortx.stanford.edu/download.php\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24 .\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 We used the Human Lung Cell Atlas as the single cell reference, subsampling the dataset to 200 cells per cell type. The log-scale normalized matrix was exponentiated, as instructed by the CIBERSORTx authors. The lung GTEx TPM expression table was used as the mixture file. We used S-mode batch correction, with fraction set to "0" and 100 permutations for statistical significance testing. The results table that we obtained from CIBERSORTx is included here: \ldblquote CIBERSORTx_Adjusted.txt\rdblquote .\par
\par
\b 3. \b0 The resultant CIBERSORTx table was analyzed with \ldblquote cibersort-OLR-analysis.R\rdblquote , which uses an ordinal logistic regression model to identify age-associated cell types, controlling for sex, smoking status, and Hardy scale. This produces a statistic table with the coefficient estimates and p-values for each cell type.\par
\par
\b 4. \b0 The OLR table can be used to make a forest plot using \ldblquote forest-plot-olr.R\rdblquote . This script also will generate summary boxplots and barplots of the CIBERSORTx proportions, grouped by cell type.\par
\b\par
5.\b0  You can generate summary boxplots of the estimated proportions in relation to age groups with "age-CSx-boxplots.unadjusted.R" and "age-CSx-boxplots.adjusted.R". The adjusted version first fits a generalized linear model to the relevant covariates (excluding age), then take the residuals for visualization.\par
\b\par
\b0\page ===============================================================\b\fs32\par
II. Bulk RNA-seq analysis of GSE147507 (Blanco-Melo et al., Cell 2020)\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\par
\b Requirements:\par
\b0 R (v.3.6.1 used for the analysis, but other versions also ok)\par
\tab -data.table\par
\tab -ggplot2\par
\tab -ggsci\par
\tab -DESeq2\par
Perl\par
\b\fs32\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\par
\b Part A || Data accession\par
1. \b0 Bulk RNA-seq quantification data from human cell lines infected with SARS-CoV-2 or mock control were obtained from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE147507): {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/series/GSE147nnn/GSE147507/suppl/GSE147507%5FRawReadCounts%5FHuman%2Etsv%2Egz }}{\fldrslt{https://ftp.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/series/GSE147nnn/GSE147507/suppl/GSE147507%5FRawReadCounts%5FHuman%2Etsv%2Egz\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 A condensed sample annotation file is provided here: "GSE147507-sample-info.txt"\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part B || Differential expression analysis\par
1. \b0 Perform the differential expression analysis in R, using the commands in "combined-deseq2.R". \par
\par
-This script will produce several text files with the DESeq2 results, with each comparison group as its own output file.\par
\par
"a" = \cf3\f2 NHBE, SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock\par
"b" = A549, SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock (rep 1, low MOI)\par
"c" = A549, SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock (rep 2, high MOI)\par
"d" = A549-ACE2, SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock\par
"e" = Calu3, SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock\par
"f" = HumanLung, COVID19 vs Ctrl\cf0\f0\par
\par
For this study, only the results from "c", "d", and "e" were used for further analysis, as these samples showed considerably stronger transcriptomic differences for \cf3\f2 SARS-CoV-2 vs Mock.\par
\par
-DESeq2 results for "c", "d", and "e" are included in the examples.\cf0\f0\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 Annotate age-associated genes in the DESeq2 table using "annotate-aging-genes.pl".\par
\par
\tab\f1\fs20 $ perl annotate-aging-genes.pl\f0\fs24\par
\par
-This will produce the DESeq2 results tables, now with age-association annotations: \par
\par
1 = cluster 1, increase in expression with age\par
2 = cluster 2, decrease in expression with age\par
0 = all other genes\par
\par
\b 3. \b0 For visualization of the results as volcano plots, run the commands in "volcano-plot.R". By default, this script produces the volcano plot for the "c" comparison group. To run this same analysis for the "d" and "e" comparisons, simply change lines 4 and 18 accordingly. \par
\par
\b 4. \b0 Intersections of the resulting gene lists can be done in R, or with a convenient online tool: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/ }}{\fldrslt{http://bioinformatics.psb.ugent.be/webtools/Venn/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
\b 5. \b0 As before, the relevant gene lists can be analyzed in DAVID: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://david.ncifcrf.gov/ }}{\fldrslt{https://david.ncifcrf.gov/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
\par
\par
\page ===============================================================\b\fs32\par
III. Single-cell RNA-seq analysis\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\par
\b Requirements:\b0\par
R (v.3.6.1 used for the analysis, but other versions ok)\par
\tab -Seurat\par
\tab -ggplot2\par
\tab -ggsci\par
\tab -viridis\par
\tab -NMF\par
\tab -scater\par
\tab -data.table\par
Perl\par
\b\fs32\par
\b0\fs24 ==================================\b\fs32\par
\fs24 Part A || Data accession\par
1. \b0 Single cell transcriptomes of human lungs were obtained from the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.tissuestabilitycellatlas.org/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.tissuestabilitycellatlas.org/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24 ) and from the Human Lung Cell Atlas ({{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://github.com/krasnowlab/HLCA }}{\fldrslt{https://github.com/krasnowlab/HLCA\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24  and {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21041850/ }}{\fldrslt{https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:syn21041850/\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24 ).\par
\par
-Since the analysis pipline for the two datasets is essentially identical, here we will describe the analysis of the data from the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas.\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 Single cell transcriptomes of bronchioalveolar lavage fluid samples from COVID-19 patients were accessed from the Gene Expression Omnibus (GSE145926).\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part B || Data analysis and visualization of normal human lungs\b0\par
\b 1. \b0 Download the "lung_ts.rds" file available on the Tissue Stability Cell Atlas, and load this into R.\par
\par
-Install Seurat, following the instructions here: {{\field{\*\fldinst{HYPERLINK https://satijalab.org/seurat/install.html }}{\fldrslt{https://satijalab.org/seurat/install.html\ul0\cf0}}}}\f0\fs24\par
-Run the commands in "scRNA-pctg-expression-analysis.aging.R".\par
\par
-This script will produce 4 text files: "pctg-expressing.ageUp.avgCelltype.txt", "pctg-expressing.ageDown.avgCelltype.txt", "pctg-expressing.Scaled.ageUp.avgCelltype.txt", and "pctg-expressing.Scaled.agedown.avgCelltype.txt". These text files detail the cell-type specific expression frequencies of genes that increase or decrease in expression with age (with or without gene-wise scaling).\par
\par
-This script will also plot two heatmaps, showing the scaled % of expressing cells for each of the age-associated genes. "age-genes-pctgExpressing-zScore-heatmap.prescale.Up.pdf" shows the genes that increase in expression with aging, while "age-genes-pctgExpressing-zScore-heatmap.prescale.Down.pdf" shows the genes that decrease in expression with aging.\par
\par
\par
\b 2. \b0 For the heatmaps in\b  \b0 subsequent figures, these are generated with the same core script "select-gene-heatmap.R", simply modifying the input gene list that is read in (see lines 6-10) and the output parameters (lines 48,52). \par
\par
\b 3. \b0 To create the heatmap shown in \b Supplementary Figure 8b\b0 , run the commands in "select-gene-heatmap.difex.R". \par
\par
-This script will produce "difex-age-intersect-heatmap.pdf".\par
\par
==================================\par
\b Part C || Data analysis and visualization of COVID-19 bronchioalveolar lavage fluid\b0\par
\b 1. \b0 Starting from the .h5 matrices from the GEO repository, combine them all into a single Seurat object using \ldblquote combine-h5.R\rdblquote . This produces \ldblquote GSE145926-merged.all.rds\rdblquote .\par
\par
\b 2.\b0  Generate pseudo-bulk transcriptome profiles for each donor by running \ldblquote generatePseudobulk.R\rdblquote . This creates a raw count matrix \ldblquote GSE145926-pseudoBulk.counts.txt\rdblquote , with one column for each donor. \par
\par
\b 3. \b0 Using the provided sample metadata file (\ldblquote GSE145926-sample-info.txt\rdblquote ), run \ldblquote deseq2.COVID.R\rdblquote  to perform differential expression analysis. This generates a results table, \ldblquote GSE145926-severe_COVID-vs-Control.de.txt\rdblquote .\par
\par
\b 4. \b0 Annotate age-associated genes in the DESeq2 table using "annotate-aging-genes.COVID.pl".\par
\par
\tab\f1\fs20 $ perl annotate-aging-genes.COVID.pl\f0\fs24\par
\par
-This will produce the file \ldblquote GSE145926-severe_COVID-vs-Control.de.Aging.txt\rdblquote , which is the same DEseq2 results, but now with age-association annotations: \par
\par
1 = cluster 1, increase in expression with age\par
2 = cluster 2, decrease in expression with age\par
0 = all other genes\par
\par
\b 5. \b0 For visualization of the results as volcano plots, run the commands detailed in "volcano-plot.COVID.R". This produces the visualizations in \b Figure 6a\b0 , along with the necessary information to generate \b Figure 6b-c\b0 .\par
\par
-The resultant volcano plot is included: \ldblquote GSE145926-volcano-severeSARS2-vs-ctrl.nolab.pdf\rdblquote .\par
\par
\par

\pard\nowidctlpar\sa200\sl276\slmult1\f3\fs22\lang9\par
}
 